---
title: "PPAT: Progressive Graph Pairwise Attention Network for Event Causality Identification"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2023-08-PPAT
excerpt: '本工作探究了文档级的事件因果关系识别。我们提出了PPAT模型，用于识别文档所有的事件对中是否存在因果关系。主要创新有三点，首先我们通过显式的区分句内和跨句的事件因果，PPAT先推理较简单的句内事件因果关系，之后基于句内事件因果关系推理较难的跨句事件因果关系。其次，PPAT利用一种Pairwise的图神经网络以适配因果推理的“前提-结论”模式，极大的提升了模型的推理效果。最后我们提出了一种因果引导的损失函数，能够成功提升模型的因果推理能力。'
venue: 'In Proceedings of the Thirty-Second International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI)'
date: 2023-08-25
paperurl: 'https://www.ijcai.org/proceedings/2023/0572.pdf'
codeurl: 'https://github.com/HITsz-TMG/PPAT'
---

**Abstract**

Event Causality Identification (ECI) aims to identify the causality between a pair of event mentions in a document, which is composed of sentence-level ECI (SECI) and document-level ECI (DECI). Previous work applies various reasoning models to identify the implicit event causality. However, they indiscriminately reason all event causality in the same way, ignoring that most inter-sentence event causality depends on intra-sentence event causality to infer.  In this paper, we propose a \textbf{P}rogressive graph \textbf{P}airwise \textbf{A}ttention ne\textbf{t}work (PPAT) to consider the above dependence. PPAT applies a progressive reasoning strategy, as it first predicts the intra-sentence event causality, and then infers the more implicit inter-sentence event causality based on the SECI result. We construct a sentence boundary event relational graph, and PPAT leverages a simple pairwise attention mechanism, which attends to different reasoning chains on the graph. In addition, we propose a causality-guided training strategy for assisting PPAT in learning causality-related representations on every layer. Extensive experiments show that our model achieves state-of-the-art performance on three benchmark datasets (5.5\%, 2.2\% and 4.5\% F1 gains on EventStoryLine, MAVEN-ERE and Causal-TimeBank).

